---
date: "2019-12-15T00:00:00Z"
description: Why you should stay at your job before you go
draft: true
title: Staying
---

Years ago, a company where I worked went through a round of layoffs. I had "survived" that round, but the longterm outlook for my career didn't look very promising. Quickly, I started a job search, found an equivalent position, and left.

While it was ultimately the right, personal decision for me to leave, it was wrong to leave at that time. Because of my haste, I ran to a job that was a poor fit. There was not a major shift in my responsibilities. I did not buy into what was being built & sold. The structure and future opportunities were not aligned with my (budding) career goals. Most important, I had ignored a couple of red flags about the culture, including an interviewer warning me about it because he felt he should. But I was desperate to get out of the previous company. 

Indeed, I made the best I could out of the next job, but it was a difficult ride that likely took years off of my life, not unlike the Pit of Despair.

<wesley being tortured>

Granted: any given job will have some aspects that are less than stellar. My father (a therapist) once told me how he hates paperwork, but that it was a part of the job and he loved everything else about it. Even the biggest sports stars and celebrities are going to be stuck with the underbellies of their professions, whether that's injuries or a loss of personal space. 

We are aware of this though; we all know rationally that no job is perfect. In fact, the imperfection of jobs is exactly what makes it a hard decision to stay. It's difficult to tell if the amazing job that recruiter is bending your ear about is actually better than the current one. By definition we do not know everything about that amazing job, and we _do_ know everything about the current one. So, there is an intrinsic information asymmetry that we must operate within.

But we must make a decision with imperfect information. In fact, in the current job market and sector, you have to make a decision regularly, even daily. And, if you're making it that often, how do you know when it's actually time to leave? When does your calculus change?

#### The inflection point

The inflection point is a storm. No, not quite the storm, but just after it. 

It could be a change of your duties or your teammates. It could be a policy change, a management change, an interpersonal conflict, or simply a tough mistake. The mentality is the important thing in these situations. You have two paths, by my estimation:

1. Hate it, and seek escape
1. Accept it, and figure out how to make it work

Here's the trick: always choose option 2. Things won't be truly clear until _after_ the storm. In my experience, choosing to leave in the middle of a storm ends up being a problem because you're not leaving for the right opportunity, you're leaving to get out of the last one. Instead of going TO, you're going FROM.

The other problem with option 1 is you can lose grip on the job you already have. In the past, I've felt myself dialing back, investing less, and seeing internal opportunities go elsewhere. (More recently as a leader, I worry about impacting morale if I'm sharing my frustration too broadly.) These mental habits can only make the present life more miserable, and create a self-fulfilling prophecy of failure. Maybe it sounds like manager-speak, but I truly feel that overcoming something unwanted is a growth opportunity. Not in terms of skills or jobs, or other kinds of coups: but personally. Overcoming the storm develops confidence and provides valuable experience.

Even when there's a major shift I disagree with, I will select option 2 and make long-term adjustments, then see how the ground looks after smoke has cleared. At that point I can have a sober, holistic evaluation of the job. If you choose option 2 every time, then a personal, strategic change is decoupled from the environment: you're choosing for you.

Here's an example. Once upon a time, I worked at a company that was facing a major shift: a loss of engineering leadership. The resulting shift in reporting structure was not going to open any doors for me. As much as I wanted to cross the tracks to that green grass, the timing was not right for me for various reasons. I could have started a search anyway, ready to gut out the poor timing, but instead I shook my head and decided to lean into the current job. That ended up being a great decision: I retooled some process where I could, and I started a long-term project that benefited not just my team, but all of Engineering. In fact, those changes I put in place remained in place for years (perhaps they are there still). Ultimately, keeping the mentality -- that I must stay -- kept my perspective in a good place, and I reaped rewards for my investment. 

When looking at things on a granular level, it can be hard to tell if you're in a storm, or in a more-permanent drift away from your own path. It's not easy to tell the difference sometimes, and likewise there are outside forces that cannot be controlled. So I'm not intending to give you "one weird trick" here. But, whenever I see a challenge coming, I take option 2: decide to stay. It is a decision. It's an important mental calibration: "I am staying here." That opens up long-term, strategic thinking, and that's what I find fulfilling.

When the horizon becomes clearly visible again, that's when decisions should be made.
